[docs] Add user guide to manage alerts in NMS (#4488)
magma/magma: docs/readmes/nms/alert.md

---
id: alerts
title: Alerts
hide_title: true
---
# Alerts

Alerts are an important part of our NMS. We highly recommend the operators to run their networks with alerts always turned on. Without alerts, it is impossible to debug any potential issues happening on the network in a timely fashion.
In this guide we will discuss

* Viewing Alerts
* Alert receiver configuration
* Alert rules configuration
    * Predefined alerts
    * Custom Alerts
* Troubleshooting

## Viewing alerts

### **Top Level Network Dashboard**

Alert dashboard displays the current firing alerts in a table tabbed by severity. In each of the columns we additionally display the labels passed along with the alert.
![viewing_alerts_1](assets/nms/userguide/alerts/viewing_alerts1.png)
### **Alarm component’s Alert Tab**

Alerts can also be viewed from the alert tab in the Alarm table.
![viewing_alerts_2](assets/nms/userguide/alerts/viewing_alerts2.png)
![viewing_alerts_3](assets/nms/userguide/alerts/viewing_alerts3.png)

## Alert Receivers

> Alert Receiver is created to push the alert notification in real time so that the operator is notified instantaneously when the alert is fired. Following example details the steps involved in creating a slack alert receiver and configuring it in NMS.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An alert receiver is created to push the alert notification in real time so that the operator is notified when the alert is fired. Following example details the steps involved in creating a slack alert receiver and configuring it in NMS.
```
it's not necessarily instantaneous, but just "real-time" so we don't want to create false expectations

### Example: Adding Slack Channel as Alert Receiver

**Generate Slack Webhook URL:**

> * Create an App: Goto https://api.slack.com/apps?new_app=1 and click on “Create New App”. Enter the App Name and the Slack Workspace.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Create an App: Go to https://api.slack.com/apps?new_app=1 and click on “Create New App”. Enter the App Name and the Slack Workspace.
```

* Click on “Incoming Webhooks” and change “Active Incoming Webhooks” to On

![alert_recv1](assets/nms/userguide/alerts/alert_recv1.png)
* Scroll down and create a new Webhook by clicking on “Add New Webhook to Workspace”. Select the Slack Channel name.

![alert_recv1](assets/nms/userguide/alerts/alert_recv2.png)
* Copy the “Webhook URL” once it is generated.

![alert_recv1](assets/nms/userguide/alerts/alert_recv3.png)
**Create a new Alert Receiver in NMS:**
![alert_recv1](assets/nms/userguide/alerts/alert_recv4.png)

**Testing the newly added alert receiver**

> <TBD>

Reviewer: are we leaving this in?

Author: Fixed it.

## Configuring Alert rules

Alert rule configuration lets us define rules for triggering alerts.

### Predefined Alerts

> Magma NMS comes loaded with some default set of alert rules. These default rules aren’t configured automatically. If operator chooses to use these default rules, they can do it by clicking “Sync Predefined Alerts” button in Alert rule configuration tab. As shown below

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Magma NMS comes loaded with some default set of alert rules. These default rules aren’t configured automatically. If an operator chooses to use these default rules, they can do it by clicking “Sync Predefined Alerts” button in Alert rule configuration tab. As shown below
```

> ![alerts1](assets/nms/userguide/alerts/alerts1.png)![alerts2](assets/nms/userguide/alerts/alerts2.png)Currently predefined alerts configure following alerts

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![alerts1](assets/nms/userguide/alerts/alerts1.png)
![alerts2](assets/nms/userguide/alerts/alerts2.png)Currently predefined alerts configure following alerts
```

* CPU percent on the gateway is running > 75% in last 5 minutes
* Unsuccessful S1 setup in last 5 minutes
* S6A authorization failures in last 5 minutes
* Upon exceptions when bootstrapping a gateway in last 5 minutes
* When services were restarted unexpectedly in last 5 minutes
* When a UE attach resulted in a failure in last 5 minutes
* When there were any service restarts in last 5 minutes

**Note:** Operator will have to go and additionally specify the receiver in each of these alerts when they want to be notified of the alerts as follows,
![alerts3](assets/nms/userguide/alerts/alerts3.png)

### Custom Alert Rules

> Operator can create custom alert rules by applying creating a expression based on metrics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Operators can create custom alert rules by creating an expression based on metrics.
```

**Metrics Overview**

> Magma gateways collect various metrics at a regular intervals and push them into Orchestrator. The Orchestrator stores these metrics in a prometheus instance(implementation detail). The prometheus instance along with alert manager provides us support in querying various metrics on the system and setting alerts based on that.

Reviewer: I'm not sure about saying prometheus is an implementation detail here since the entire alerting framework relies on using prometheus. At this point it's not really a detail and more of an integral part of orc8r. Also Prometheus should probably be capitalized.

> We currently support following metrics on our Access gateways.

Reviewer: I feel like this list should belong somewhere else, maybe in its own doc and you can link to it here

Author: I plan to add a doc for metrics as well. I will move it there and link it here. For now I will merge this and move this in a new PR.

|ue_context_release_req	|UE context release request	|AGW	|No	|MME	|
|s1ap_error_ind_rcvd	|S1AP error indication received	|AGW	|No	|MME	|
|s1_reset_from_enb	|S1 reset from eNB	|AGW	|No	|MME	|
|nas_non_delivery_indication_received	|NAS non delivery indication received	|AGW	|No	|MME	|
|spgw_create_session	|SPGW create session success	|AGW	|No	|MME	|
|ue_pdn_connection	|UE PDN connection	|AGW	|No	|MME	|
|ue_pdn_connectivity_req	|UE PDN connectivity request	|AGW	|No	|MME	|
|	|	|	|	|	|
|ue_reported_usage / up	|Reported TX traffic for subscriber / session in bytes	|AGW	|Yes	|sessiond	|
|ue_reported_usage / down	|Reported RX traffic for subscriber / session in bytes	|AGW	|Yes	|sessiond	|
|ue_dropped_usage / up	|Reported dropped TX traffic for subscriber / session in bytes	|AGW	|No	|sessiond	|
|ue_dropped_usage / down	|Reported dropped RX traffic for subscriber / session in bytes	|AGW	|No	|sessiond	|

More up to date information might be available from the “Metrics Explorer” in the metrics component.
![alerts4](assets/nms/userguide/alerts/alerts4.png)
**Custom Alert Configuration**

An alert configuration consists of

* Name/Description of the alert
* Alert Definition

> * Alert receiver to be notified when the alert is fired
> * Additional labels which can be added to provide more information about the alert.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Alert receiver to be notified when the alert is fired (optional)
* Additional labels which can be added to provide more information about the alert (optional)
```

> Alert definition is the most interesting attribute in the configuration. It consists of a metric expression(based on prometheus promQL expression) and a duration attribute which specifies the time for the expression to be true, following which the alert is fired.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Alert definition consists of a metric expression (a Prometheus PromQL expression) and a duration attribute which specifies the time for the expression to be true, following which the alert is fired.
```
Consider linking to https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/querying/basics/ on "PromQL"

![alerts5](assets/nms/userguide/alerts/alerts4.png)![alerts6](assets/nms/userguide/alerts/alerts4.png)

> Following examples shows how we can use the above mentioned metrics and add custom alerts based on them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following examples show how we can create custom alerts on the above mentioned metrics.
```

**eNB Down Alert:**

> This alert fire if eNB Rf Tx is down in any of the gateways in your network.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This alert will fire if eNB Rf Tx is down in any of the gateways in your network.
```
add "will" here for all of the following examples

Expression:

```

> sum by(gatewayID) (enodeb_rf_tx_enabled{networkID="<your network ID>"} < 1)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
enodeb_rf_tx_enabled{networkID="<your network ID>"} < 1
```
I'm not 100% sure about this metric but you don't need to sum by gatewayID since this metric should only have one series per gateway right?

Author: In HA feature, we can have something like this.

```

Duration:
10 minutes

**No Connected eNB Alert:**
This alert fire if the connected eNB count falls to ‘0’ for any of the gateways in your network.

Simple: Select “enb_connected” metric from the dropdown and construct the if statement as **“if enb_connected < 1”**

> Advanced Expression:

Reviewer: At some point before these examples you should explain the difference between an advanced expression and a regular threshold expression.

```

> (enb_connected{networkID="<your network ID>"}) < 1

Reviewer: ```suggestion
enb_connected{networkID="<your network ID>"} < 1
```

```

Duration:
5 minutes

**Free Memory is < 10 Alert:**

> This alert fire if the Free Memory of any of the gateways in your network is less than 10%

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This alert will fire if the free memory of any of the gateways in your network is less than 10%
```

Advanced Expression:

```

> ((1 - mem_available{networkID="<your network ID>"} / mem_total{networkID=~"<your network ID>"}) * 100) > 90

Reviewer: This is just a suggestion on the alert itself. As it is it's fine for an example. You should do an `avg_over_time(metric[5m]) > 90` to avoid randomness preventing this from firing. The way your expression is written if there's a single datapoint at 89 during those 15 minutes then it won't fire.

```

Duration:
15 minutes

**High Disk Usage Alert:**
This alert fire if the disk usage of any of the gateways in your network is more than 80%
Simple Way: Select “disk*_percent*” metric from the dropdown and construct the if statement as **“if disk*_percent* > 80”**
Advanced Expression:

```
(disk_percent{networkID="<your network ID>"}) > 80
```

Duration:
15 minutes

**Attach Success Rate Alert:**
This alert fire if the attach success rate of any of the gateways in your network is less than 50% for a 3h window.
Expression:

```

> (sum by(gatewayID) (increase(ue_attach{action="attach_accept_sent",networkID="<your network ID>"}[3h]))) * 100 / (sum by(gatewayID) (increase(ue_attach{action=~"attach_accept_sent|attach_reject_sent|attach_abort",networkID="<your network ID>"}[3h]))) < 50

Reviewer: Since this is pretty complex you might want to break it down and explain what's going on. That might be out of scope here since it would just be explaining PromQL. Up to you if you think that would be useful.

Author: Added a brief explanation here.
